% Syntax
% Cadel Watson
% 1/8/2016

# Alignment

The alignment of Ngujari depends on whether the noun in question is an animate
pronoun or not. For clauses with exclusively animate pronouns, the alignment is
nominative-accusative, but otherwise it is ergative-nominative (i.e. the
transitive patient and intransitive object are marked nominative and the
transitive agent is marked ergative). This system applies only to intransitive
and transitive verbs. For higher valencies, formed through valence modification,
the extra arguments are assigned cases semantically.

# Clauses

## Verb Phrases

(*)Verb Phrase: vp = aux [neg] np(s) [adv(s)] [val] v

Verb phrases can be as simple as a single avalent verb, such as in "it's
raining", or as complex as a tetravalent causative.

In the prototypical verb clause, the following rules govern word order:

1.  The verb's auxiliary appears at the beginning.

2.  The verb itself appears at the end.

3.  Valence modifiers appear immediately before the verb.

The following examples illustrate basic verb phrases:

(@) k-i wa-j kurru-l ji wurr-u-ø,
    strike.aux-pres 1s-nom 2s-ACC 0.val.2 electrically.storm-an-1st,
    I strike you.

(@) wann-uma maaju-maaju-j ka jinn-u-m,
    see.aux-pst kangaroo-pl-nom 2.val.1 eat-an-3rd,
    The kangaroos ate/were eating.

Noun phrases tend to appear in order of importance to the statement as judged by
the speaker.

## Noun Phrases

(*)Noun Phrase: np = [adj(s)-attr] n

A noun phrase consists of one noun, declined by case, and any number of
adjectives and relative clauses. The noun tends to be placed first, followed by
adjectives, although this can be inverted or even mixed according to pragmatic
considerations. However, relative clauses always succeed the noun and
adjectives.

(@) birru-ø birruku miinna,
    sea-ERG blue big,
    vast blue sea

(@) kanaama yirlirna-j gu,
    woven basket-NOM small,
    small woven basket

## Relative Clauses

(*)Relative Clause: rc = [aux] [neg] v [val] [adv(s)] np(s)

Relative clauses are *adjoined* to the noun phrase. The clause undergoes a
transformation from the standard verb phrase by moving the verb to the position
immediately following the auxiliary. If the relative clause is in the same tense
and mood as the main clause, the relative auxiliary can be omitted. The valency
modifier is free to be placed anywhere among the remaining noun phrases and
adverbs, but typically follows the verb.

If the head noun is a patient of the relative clause, the verb of the relative
clause has its valence reduced by one.

(@) wiingu-ø k-a pirr-u-ø ka wa-j,
    man-erg aux-pst see-an-1st 2.val.1 1s-nom,
    the man that I saw

If the head noun is the agent, a pronoun is used inside the relative clause to
refer back to it.

(@) j-a Wuurna-ø nn-uuki-ti yann-u-mi nna-j jurlu-l wa-j ka naj-u-m,
    say.aux-pst Wuurna-erg aux-fut-dub catch-an-3rd 3s-nom turtle-acc 1s-nom 3.val.2 say-an-3rd,
    Wuurna, who might catch a turtle, spoke to me.

## Adverbial Phrases

(*)Adverbial Phrase: ap = aux np(s) [val] [manner(s)] v [temporal(s)]

Temporal adverbs, which specify the time an action takes place, tend to appear
following the verb.

(@) k-a jana-ø jari-rn wiirr-uu-ø yuurli-rna ma,
    go.aux-pst 1s.ch-erg beach-loc go-ch-1st day-rev one,
    Yesterday, I [a child] went to the beach.

Manner adverbs, which specify the manner in which the action was conducted,
usually appear directly before the verb.

(@) nn-uuki-yii waya-ø pirwa-pirwa-j garrna gann-u-ø,
    pickup.aux-fut-wimp 1pl-erg clothing-pl-nom quickly pickup-an-1st,
    We should pick up the clothes quickly.

However, both can occupy different positions inside the verb phrase if the
speaker desires it.

# Predicates

There are three cases for predicates: adjectival, nominal, and locational.

## Adjectival

(*)Adjectival Predicate: apred = n [adj(s)-pred/n-com]

In an adjectival predicative phrase a verb is not normally required. The noun is
assigned the same tense as it would be were it the argument to an intransitive
verb, while the adjective assumes its predicative inflection.

(@) puurna-j birruku-ku,
    sky-nom blue-an,
    The sky is blue.

The adjectival predicative can be counter-intuitively used with a noun, by
placing the noun into the comitative case. This is usually employed when
describing a changeable state.

(@) murta-j gurlu-yi,
    berry-nom freshness-com,
    The berry is fresh.

## Nominal

(*)Nominal Predicate: npred = be.aux n-subj n-obj be

In a nominal predicative phrase, the verb `ngurr` is used. The predicate noun is
declined as verb's object.

(@) ngarr-i wa-ø gajangu-j ngurr-u-ø,
    be.aux-pres 1s-erg teacher be-an-1st,
    I am a teacher.

## Locational

(*)Locational Predicate: lpred = be.aux n-subj n-loc be

In a locational predicative phrase, `ngurr` is still used, but the predicate
location is declined in the locative case.

(@) k-i wurlki-ø kirujunga-ø ngurr-a-m,
    be.aux-pres village-erg somewhere-loc be-inan-3rd,
    The village is somewhere.

# Possession

## Alienable

To indicate alienable possession (possession that is not permanent or subject to
change), the locative case is used in conjunction with the verb `ngurr`. The
possessed noun appears in the locative case as the subject of the transitive
form of `ngurr`, with the possessor appearing as the object in the usual case.

(@) ngarr-i mulu-mulu-ka-rn mungu-j ngurr-a-m,
    be.aux-pres deadfish-pl-dual-loc woman-nom be-inan-3rd,
    The woman has two dead fish.

## Inalienable

Inalienable possession (possession that is unequivocal) is indicated simply
through the use of the verb `gurr`.

(@) garr-aa-nga ngungu-j jarta-l ka gurr-u-ø,
    have.aux-fut-gno mob-nom homeland-acc 3.val.2 have-an-1st,
    Our mob will always have a homeland.

## Pronominal

A noun phrase can be indicated as possessed through the use of a possessive
pronoun as an adjective.

(@) nn-uma nnaa-ø waju-j yurni nna-lu giinn-u-m,
    admire.aux-pst 3pl.an-erg face-nom beautiful 3s.an-pos admire-an-3rd,
    They admired his beautiful face.

In Ngujari culture, an object can be owned by a mob as a whole. Only inanimate
objects may be possessed by a mob (with the exception of areas of land).
Possession is indicated by the particle `tuu`, which appears before the noun. To
specify the possessing mob, the mob's name is placed immediately after the
particle. The regular name is used by members of the possessing mob, but the
honorific name is used for possessions of others. For example, the particle for
something owned by the Wujanga mob would be *tuu-Wujanga* for a member or
*tuu-Wujarra* for an outsider.

(@) nn-i-ju waya-ø tuu-Gurnu jaku nnalu-j muu-ma naa tinn-u-ø,
    protect.aux-strimp 1pl-erg pos-gurnu precious land-nom spirit-inst 2.val.3 protect-an-1st,
    We must protect our [the Gurnu mob's] precious land with vigour.

# Interrogative

## Polar Questions

Polar questions are syntactically the same as a factual statement,
except they are expressed with a rising tone at the beginning of the
question.

(@) nn-uuki kupa-kupa-ø gaypa-gaypa-rn narnn-u-m?,
    fly.aux-fut bird-pl-erg mountain-pl-loc fly-an-3rd,
    Will the birds fly to the mountains?

## Non-Polar Questions

One way of forming a non-polar question is using an interrogative
pronoun as a verb's argument, with no syntactic change taking place.

(@) kiru ngarr-i wumpa-j j-i palyaj-a-m nnu-ø wurlki-j ngurr-a-m,
    where be.aux-prs path-nom leadto.aux-prs leadto-inan-3rd 3s.inan-erg village-nom be-inan-3rd,
    Where is the path that leads to the village?

To question a certain word in a statement, the particle `yuu` can be
placed before the word.

(@) k-aa yuu-nnara-ø nurtwu-j panwa-rnu mirr-uu-m,
    bring.aux-fut int-3dual.an-erg food-nom fire-ori bring-ch-3rd,
    Will those two children bring the food to the fire?

(@) nn-i wa-ø yuu-gurlurni parnti-j jinn-u-mi,
    eat.aux-pres 3s-erg int-fresh kangaroomeat-nom eat-an-3rd,
    Is he eating fresh kangaroo meat?

# Comparative

Ngujari contains locational-type comparatives. This means that the *standard*
noun, or the noun to be judged against, is marked in the revertive case.
Comparatives do not use a verb, and are always positive (i.e. more adjective
than the standard). The adjective is in the predicative inflection.

(@) nna-j wa-rna yam-u,
    3s-nom 1s-rev tall-an,
    He is taller than me.

For comparatives in relative clauses, the adjective is fronted and is followed
by the arguments.

(@) k-a nnalji-ø junn-u nna-ø wiinguurki-rna yuki-j ka giirr-u-m,
    win.aux-pst dingo-erg fast-an 3s-erg boy-rev race-nom 2.val.1 win-an-3rd,
    The dingo, who is faster than the boy, won the race.

# Conditional

There are two types of conditionals: implicative and predictive. The protasis
(condition) and apodosis (outcome) are modified in different ways.

implicative

:   The conditional is a universal truth. Whenever the condition is
    true, the outcome is also true.

predictive

:   The conditional is a prediction. If the condition occurs, the
    outcome will occur.

To form both conditionals, the condition verb phrase appears first, followed
immediately by the outcome verb phrase. There is no morpheme with equivalent
meaning to "if". However, the outcome is always placed in the subjunctive mood
and the present tense.

In an implicative conditional, the condition is given the gnomic mood. The
statement must therefore follow the usual rules of the gnomic, in that it must
state an undisputable truth. The condition is always in the present tense.

(@) k-i-nga kunii-ø mu-rn naa yarr-uu-n j-i-tirlu kunii-j ka mulj-awuu-n,
    fall.aux-prs-gno 2dual.ch-erg water-loc 1.val.2 fall-ch-2nd wet.aux-prs-sbjv 2dual-ch-nom 2.val.1 wet-ch-2nd,
    If you two fall in the water, you will both get wet.

In a predictive conditional, the condition is usually not given a mood. However,
if the phrase is counterfactual, in that the condition is not seen as likely,
the condition occurs in the dubitative mood. Usually, the condition will be in
the future tense.

(@) nn-uuki palwuuwa-j ka girnn-aa-mi k-i yannu-ø nna-j ji wurr-a-rn,
    break.aux-fut branch-nom 2.val.1 break-inan-3rd strike.aux-pres dem.sg.inan-erg 3s-an-nom 0.val.2 strike-inan-3rd,
    If that branch breaks, it will strike him.

(@) k-aa-tila nna-ø maaju-j yirn parr-u-m ngarr-tiru nurtwa-nurtwa-rn yuni waya-j ngurr-a-m,
    hunt.aux-fut-dub 3s.an-erg kangaroo-nom completedly hunt-an-3rd be.aux-subj food-pl-loc lots 1pl-nom be-inan-3rd,
    If he were to successfully hunt the kangaroo [unlikely], we would have lots of food.

# Negative

There are two types of negation: clausal, where the entire clause is negated,
and constituent, where one noun is negated.

The formation of the clausal negative requires the negative particle that
corresponds to the class of the clause's verb. In a standard negative clause,
the particle follows the verb's auxiliary. However, in imperative clauses it
precedes the auxiliary. Qualifiers such as "never" are used following the
sentence, as stand-alone utterances.

(@) k-a tu nna-ø naarla wiirr-u-m,
    go.aux-pst neg 3s.an-erg there go-an-3rd,
    He didn't go there.

(@) ti j-i-yuu ku-j waa yanj-awu-n. wulnni,
    neg steal.aux-strimp 2s-nom 3.val.1 steal-an-2nd never,
    You must never steal.

The consituent negative is applicable to clauses using `gurr`. It is formed
using the special argument *tunna* in the comitative slot of the verb.

(@) rr-i gunnari-ø guwa-guwa-j tunna gurr-a-m,
    have.aux-prs tree-erg leaf-pl-nom none have-inan-3rd,
    The tree doesn't have any leaves.

# Reflexive/Reciprocal

In reflexive clauses, the personal pronoun of the subject simply occupies the
object position in the usual case. However, the valence of the verb must be
decreased by one.

(@) k-i Paya-ø nna-j ka tiirr-u-m,
    carefor.aux-prs paya-erg 3s.an-nom 2.val.1 carefor-an-3rd,
    Paya cares for himself.

If the clause is reciprocal, which applies only to plural subjects, the personal
pronoun is still used except it takes the comitative case. The valence is also
still decreased by one.

(@) k-arlu kuu-j kuu-yi ka pirr-u-n,
    see.aux-rem 2pl-nom 2pl-com 2.val.1 see-an-2nd,
    You [plural] used to see each other.

# Gerunds

The gerund of a verb serves two purposes. It can act in a way similar to the
English gerund, where the verb is used as a noun, or in a way similar to an
infinitive, meaning roughly "in order to".

The gerund is formed through nominalising the verb. The last vowel of the verb
is simply appended as a suffix.

When used in the nominal form, the gerund takes the appropriate noun case.

(@) k-arlu wa-j junnu yuurr-u-ø,
    like.aux-rem 1s-nom swim.ger like-an-1st,
    I used to like swimming.

In the infinitive form, the gerund is placed before the verb's auxiliary.

(@) parra k-a nni-j naarla wiirr-u-m,
    hunt.ger go.aux-pst 3s.an-nom there go-an-3rd,
    He went there to hunt.

# Causatives

There are two forms of the causative. The first occurs when a single noun is
responsible for causing a verb phrase to occur. In this case, the comitative
causative is used. However, if an entire verb phrase is responsible, the
subjunctive purposive is used.

## Comitative Causative

In the comitative causative, an extra argument is added to the verb phrase
without modifying the valence. The argument is the causer, and takes the former
subject's form (be it nominative or ergative). The causee, or the argument which
was formerly the subject, then takes the comitative case instead. The verb
remains in agreement with the former subject.

(@) j-a turrayi-j mu nnij-a-m,
    capsize.aux-pst canoe-nom capsize-inan-3rd,
    The canoe capsized.

(@) j-a turrayi-yi nna-j mu nnij-a-m,
    capsize.aux-pst canoe-com 3s.an-nom capsize-inan-3rd,
    He caused the canoe to capsize.

(@) k-a wa-ø wuta-j walu gukarr-u-ø,
    drop.aux-pst 1s-erg axe-nom my drop-an-1st,
    I dropped my axe.

(@) k-a wa-yi wuta-j walu gaju-ø gukarr-u-ø,
    drop.aux-pst 1s-com axe-nom my wind-erg drop-an-1st,
    The wind caused me to drop my axe.

## Subjunctive Purposive

The subjunctive purposive is formed through the use of the verb `nnurr`. The
auxiliary, *nnarr* takes the present tense, and begins the sentence. The verb
itself is not required, but it still takes two verb phrases as arguments. The
verb phrase causing the other assumes its usual tense and mood, but the caused
action becomes present and subjunctive.

(@) nnarr-i k-a nna-ø naarla wiirr-u-m j-i-tirlu wa-j nna-l nnurr-u-ø,
    effect.aux-prs go.aux-pst 3s.an-erg there go-an-3rd follow.aux-prs-sbjv 1s-nom 3s-an-acc follow-an-1st,
    He went there, so I followed him.

# Subjunctive

## Desires

To express desires, a "wanting" verb is used, such as `mann`, along with a verb
phrase in the subjunctive expressing the desired action. The action can be in
any tense.

(@) nn-i wa-j j-a-tirlu ti nna-j ngarj-awu-m mann-u-ø,
    wish.aux-prs 1s-nom hurt.aux-pst-sbjv neg 3s.an-nom hurt-an-3rd wish-an-1st,
    I wish that he hadn't hurt himself.

## Speculation

If the speaker is speaking hypothetically about a situation, the subjunctive can
be used. In this case, the verb `ngurr` would be used with a predicate adjective
rather than the verbless construction.

(@) ngarr-aa-tilu parra-ø kurlu-j tuwilwa-wa ka ngurr-a-m,
    be.aux-fut-sbjv hunt-erg thing-NOM dangerous-in 2.val.1 be-inan-3rd,
    The [prospective] hunt would be very dangerous.